---
title: "Networked Digital ICTs and the Humanitarian Arena: Challenges to Current Humanitarian Practice and Doctrine"
author:
- "Daniel P. Scarnecchia, Harvard University"
- "Nathaniel A. Raymond, Yale University"
- "Danielle N. Poole, Harvard University"
abstract: "Much of the literature on humanitarian practice is focused on the uses of digital technology by responders. This literature does notconsistently examine how such technology is being used by other actorsin the humanitarian arena and its potential subsequent effects onhumanitarian outcomes. This paper explores how networked digital ICTsmay be mediating information in ways that directly affect the offlinenature of humanitarian crises. We draw on evidence from migrationstudies, political science, and social network research to demonstratethat these technologies have the potential to shape the ways in whichthe displaced seek aid, the nature of crises, and humanitariangovernance. From this we call on the sector to establish a researchagenda which seeks to comprehensively understand the range of effectscreated by networked digital ICTs on the outcomes of aid."
keywords: "information and communications technology, humanitarian governance, global governance, humanitarian arena, displaced populations"
bibliography: [digitally_networked_refugees.bib]
---

***Under Review. Please do not cite or circulate without permission.***

Since 2002, when the amount of information and data stored digitally surpassed that of analogue storage, the amount of information stored, processed, and communicated by humanity has grown by several orders of
magnitude.\[1\] At the same time, the number of unique mobile phone
subscriptions is expected to rise to 5.7 billion by decade’s end. Of
these connections, industry trade group GSMA expects 75% to be 3G/4G
mobile broadband by the end of the decade.\[2\] Digital information
communication technologies (digital ICTs) are now being utilized across
the humanitarian programming cycle for disaster preparedness, needs
assessment, aid delivery, and evaluation. Additionally, many
crisis-affected populations, including displaced populations, are now
perceived as tech-savvy, possessing mobile phones and relying on Wi-Fi
networks and cellular coverage.\[3\] The initial excitement about the
possibilities of digital ICTs has been tempered by an increased
awareness of the risks these technologies may create for the
crisis-affected\[4\] and a growing acknowledgement of the need for a
better understanding of how the crises-affected use these
technologies.\[5\] However, further theory development and research
needs to be conducted on how the global shift towards digital
connectively effects the nature of crises, humanitarian response, and
subsequently the crisis-affected.

Vinck et. al point out that humanitarian organizations are just
beginning to understand how technology— particularly networked digital
ICTs—are being instrumentalized to undermine trust in our society, and
the particularly worrying impacts it has on humanitarian organizations
and affected peoples.\[6\] The aim of this article is extend this to
present a broader understanding of digital technology’s affordances and
potential impacts on the humanitarian sector, the crisis-affected, and
humanitarian outcomes. This paper does not seek to add to the rich
literature on the risks of humanitarian technology use and innovation to
affected populations, per se.\[7\] Rather, it aims to discuss the
mediating effects of new technologies on expressions of human agency
among the crisis-affected and its potential to create new sites of
contention within global politics which may shift the ordering of
humanitarian governance and affect the outcomes of aid.

These broader implications effect how humanitarians understand
technology use by the crisis-affected and other parties in the
humanitarian arena, and subsequently how they design interventions that
can meet the needs of digitally connected crisis-affected populations,
protection strategies to mitigate risks to the crisis-affected, and
policy designed to ameliorate efforts by ill-intentioned actors
attempting to instrumentalize aid to their own ends. In addition, there
are implications for how humanitarian agencies engage with large
technology companies, and advocate on behalf of the interests of
humanitarianism and the crisis-affected.\[8\]

First, we examine the changing role of information in crises and look at
the emerging evidence that digital ICTs are becoming an important source
of information for displaced populations. In the second section, we draw
on sociological work explaining the emergent nature of communities and
activities through networked digital ICTs. We then explore how states
and other actors contest the humanitarian arena, order humanitarian
governance, and affect aid outcomes. The third section then examines
three areas of concern to humanitarians for evidence that networked
digital ICTs are affecting aid outcomes: migration, political violence,
and global politics. Finally, we draw on these examples to suggest a
humanitarian research agenda which seeks to comprehensively understand
the range of effects created by networked digital ICTs on
humanitarianism.

## The changing role of information in humanitarian crises and responses

The traditional view of humanitarian information flows is one where NGOs
gather needs and information from beneficiaries and send resources
downstream to those in need.\[9\] While some interventions, such as
Communicating with Communities (CWC), are predicated upon the notion
that information is integral to the provision of aid,\[10\] these
downward flows of information are constructed around the idea of the
affected as beneficiary and the NGO as a monopolistic provider of
information. However, the displaced person is not merely a beneficiary
of information, but an active agent at the centre of a complex
information environment in which they may be seeking, using and
transmitting information.\[11\] This, in turn, has the potential to
shape the crisis space.

Deficits in information communicated by sources such as states and NGOs
may often leave displaced people with no alternative but to turn to
sources outside the organized response, such as smugglers, for
information.\[12\] Wall et al. describe a state of "*information
precarity*" "in which \[the affected population’s\] access to news as
well as personal information is insecure, unstable, and undependable,
leading to potential threats to their well-being.\[13\]" For example, in
Foran and Ianucci’s survey of migrants’ information needs in Italy,
communication of information from official sources exists in an
information ecosystem in competition with unofficial sources.\[14\] They
found failures in information provision were created by a broad
interpretation of what the law specifies needed to be supplied, a lack
of translators and cultural mediation, and lack of organization.
Migrants were left uninformed, and with their information needs unmet or
informed by inaccurate information, migrants engaged with alternative
information channels to fulfil their needs. For displaced persons
residing in countries without formally designated camp settlements, such
as Lebanon, reliance on informal sources of information can propagate
misinformation and rumours.\[15\] In other cases, such as in Uganda’s
Dadaab refugee camps, lack of information was identified by camp
residents as a barrier to accessing basic needs such as food, shelter,
and water.\[16\] Similarly, in Jordan’s Za’atari camp refugees reported
that a lack of information hinders their access to food, medical care,
and shelter.\[17\]

These highlighted cases allude to how displaced populations, as well as
other populations affected by crises, are often in a state of extreme
information precarity, which affects decision-making and perceived and
real vulnerabilities. Emerging evidence suggests that at least some of
those affected by crises in this state appear to be turning to mobile
technology to meet their information needs: media reports suggest that
some displaced populations prioritize mobile technology over other
sources of aid\[18\] and that respondents perceive connectivity as
critical to their survival.\[19\] Information precarity and unmet
information needs thus may be intrinsically tied to the human security
of affected populations.

What effect does mobile connectivity have on the overall human security
of specific populations compared to others? Emerging evidence of the
effects of connectivity on displaced populations offers some clues. A
BBC Media Action study of refugees in Greece and Germany showed that
those who maintained contact with families and had "wide communication
networks" were more resilient than those who did not. They felt that
greater access to information allowed them to better access aid and
allowed them to make decisions about their situation.\[20\] Oxford
University’s Humanitarian Innovation Project shows that mobile
connectivity may help grow and sustain refugee economies.\[21\] In
another case, preliminary results from a study undertaken in a Syrian
refugee camp in Greece show that increased mobile phone use and access
may be significantly associated with a reduction in the probability of
being moderately or severely depressed.\[22\]

It is true too that while respondents to humanitarian surveys on
information sources frequently assert that mobile technology is widely
used, structural barriers to access may exist, including (but not
limited to) gender,\[23\] whether the population was urban or
rural,\[24\] and lack of infrastructure and service.\[25\] As such,
without further research into the barriers to and determinants of
access, the connectivity of affected and displaced populations cannot be
generalized, nor can the outcomes of aid be sufficiently predicted.

Further development of theory, evidence, and a professional
understanding of the effects of information precarity on affected
populations may be required to design and implement necessary
interventions meeting the needs of digitally networked affected
populations, particularly in refugee or displacement scenarios. Further,
aid outcomes may be shaped by the unintended effects of the affected
populations use of these technologies, as they may create new
vulnerability by revealing data about themselves.\[26\] For these
interventions to be effective and ethical, further research is needed
for humanitarians to be sufficiently responsive to displaced populations
that are digitally literate, mobile-connected, and using technology to
coordinate and survive.

## Networked Digital ICTs and the Humanitarian Arena

Before attempting to understand the barriers to access and information
needs, it is necessary to interrogate the networked nature of modern
digital ICTs—such as computers, mobile and smartphones—in the context of
human society. What we term in this paper as networked digital ICTs are
specifically those digital ICTs and platforms which connect users in
both a one-to-one and one-to-many fashion—e.g., social media platforms
such as Facebook and messaging platforms such as WhatsApp. These have
the potential to change how displaced people communicate and seek
information, alter crises themselves, and affect the global discourse
around crises and humanitarian operations in ways which affect the
outcomes of aid.

### Networked and Algorithmic Publics

Unlike previous forms of information dissemination, such as the radio,
networked digital ICTs have fundamentally different properties affecting
information spread.\[27\] This is because networks exhibit emergent
behaviour,\[28\] there is trust inherent in peer-to-peer sharing, and
weak tie networks have a propensity to introduce novel information into
peer groups.\[29\] The process by which this occurs is fairly well
understood. Social network theory identifies different types of ties
between individuals.\[30\] Strong ties are close relationships, such as
those between close friends or family members. Weak ties are
acquaintances, or distant relationships more likely to be activated for
a specific purpose rather than an emotional bond. Latent ties are
relationships that exist, in a mathematical sense, but have not yet been
activated, and require a social stimulus to do so. Latent ties have the
potential to become weak ties. Weak ties have been demonstrated to be
more important to people seeking information, as they bridge social
groups and become a primary source of non-redundant or novel
information.\[31\]

Connected populations of all sorts are actors engaging in communications
mediated by network technology. boyd suggests that "networked publics"
emerge from these networks and defines them as "publics that are
restructured by networked technologies. As such, they are simultaneously
(1) the space constructed through networked technologies and (2) the
imagined collective that emerges as a result of the intersection of
people, technology, and practice.\[32\]"

Networked publics are made distinct by the ways technology shapes them
and creates new possibilities for engagement, interaction, and
information flows.\[33\] Novel attributes of these technologies alter
the manner in which people engage in social life, self-expression, and
communication.\[34\] They also introduce new dynamics that alter the
social context of participants regarding privacy, place, and role.\[35\]

The foundational vision of many of the global platforms which facilitate
networked publics is one in which access to more and higher quality
information by individuals will yield more informed decision-making by
individuals.\[36\] The resulting platforms were built on engineering
choices designed to foster interaction and engagement, and make legible
the social connections between users and ideas. These architectural
choices have not been without their downsides. The emergence of
algorithms as mediators of content within these platforms have created
effects which keep users engaged but subvert their foundational visions.
Algorithms are, of course, designed to many ends—but many of those in
the context of social media are to keep the user engaged, largely by
exaggerating confirmation bias and feeding the user more of what they
want to hear.\[37\] For example, platforms providing users interested in
politicized or controversial content increasingly with extremist
viewpoints which subsequently leads viewers to trust more extremist
political positions.\[38\]

The vision of connecting disparate groups has been subverted by this
phenomenon. The foundational promise of this technology was to connect
users across interest groups. In reality, users have been more tightly
connected to people sharing similar biases, affinities, and
interests.\[39\] These "calculated publics" are shaped by the
information that algorithms determine are worth sharing.\[40\]
Subsequently, algorithmic mediation of content may create a politics of
their own.

### Humanitarian Governance and the Humanitarian Arena

In order to assess the effects of these new politics of the networked
and algorithmic public on humanitarianism and displaced populations, it
is first necessary to situate humanitarianism within global politics.
Barnett provides a critical definition of humanitarian governance as a
"project to ‘secure the welfare of the population, the improvement of
its condition, the increase of its wealth, longevity, health,’ and the
betterment of its general well-being."\[41\] He argues that this
definition allows for us to focus on the consequences of aid, and
understand this project as means of rule and power.\[42\] Understanding
humanitarian governance as a means of rule affords provides us with two
advantages. The first is that in considering the effects of aid, we can
distinguish between a normative idea of humanitarianism, and
humanitarianism as it exists in the world.\[43\] Hilhorst and Jenson
contrast a normative humanitarian space,\[44\] constructed out norms and
principles, and a humanitarian arena in which a range of "actors
negotiate the outcomes of aid."\[45\]

The second is that in considering the question of the processes which
define what counts as humanitarian situation requiring outside
intervention, he allows for us to consider that the power of
humanitarian governance is contestable—viz. subject to global power
politics.\[46\] Dijkzeul and Sandvik site humanitarian governance within
the humanitarian arena, and argue that many actors engaged in
humanitarian action see humanitarian activities as a good to be captured
or a threat to be countered.\[47\] Hugo Slim puts it plainly:

> "Humanitarianism is always politicized somehow. It is a political
> project in a political world. Its mission is a political one – to
> restrain and ameliorate the use of organised violence in human
> relations and to engage with power in order to do so. Powers that are
> either sympathetic or unsympathetic to humanitarian action in war
> always have an interest in shaping it their way."\[48\]

Platforms designed to facilitate the emergence of the networked public
and algorithmic mediate content can make legible and manipulatable the
connections between users and between users and ideas. These are in
effect, tools of surveillance and behaviour modification.\[49\] In the
hands of ill-intended actors, these tools are being used to monitor and
control descent and they can provide leaders, states, and political
entrepreneurs with the ability to manipulate public discourse and
mobilize their own supporters.\[50\]

Like the analogue world, cyberspace is a political space with complex
power relationships, where the unique effects of networks can create new
power dynamics between individual actors, groups, and states.\[51\] In
this regard, cyberspace is not a neutral intermediary that transports
information between devices. Instead, it is capable of transforming,
distorting, and imbuing meaning as it mediates information between
devices and users.\[52\] We will further explore the relationship
between cyberspace and the contestation of the humanitarian arena in the
next section.

## Humanitarianism in the Networked Age: Evidence

An examination of the impact of networked technology on three related
realms of inquiry—migration, political violence, and global politics—can
inform an understanding of how these technologies may be transforming
humanitarian crises and affecting humanitarian governance. First, we
focus on migration and displaced populations. The use of networked
digital ICTs by displaced peoples has the potential to change how they
communicate, seek information, and aid, and alter crises themselves, and
affect the global discourse around crises and humanitarian operations.
It also has the potential to upend the traditional humanitarian
hierarchy of provider and affected population, \[53\] and it provides a
means for as affected populations, including the displaced, to become
participants in the humanitarian arena as they advocate for their own
role in humanitarian action.\[54\]

The section on political violence examines how networked publics have
the potential to create humanitarian crises. It takes considers the role
of networked digital ICTs in creating new politics within Myanmar which
may have affected the timing and severity of the Rakhine crisis.

Third, the section on global politics provides two cases as evidence of
the potential effects of networked digital ICTs and their emergent
publics on the humanitarian arena and how they may contribute to
humanitarian outcomes. The first case examines the role of
disinformation spread via these networked technologies in contesting the
humanitarian arena in Syria and its effect on humanitarian outcomes. The
second examines the role of the networked public in effecting the
positions and desired outcomes of states as actors in the humanitarian
arena during the 2014 Ebola response.

Migrants can be displaced populations, but not all displaced populations
are migrants. At the time of writing, much of the scholarly literature
examining the effects of the use of digital ICTs by migrant populations
are focused on migrants as a whole—particularly economic migrants. For
the purposes of this paper we ignore the distinction as a starting point
by which we can present evidence that digital ICTs and networked digital
ICTs affect population movements and decision-making. However, the
distinction between migrants as a whole and displaced populations is
salient: Displaced populations are often particularly vulnerable and are
governed by specific legal regimes.

The link between displaced populations and the effects of networked
digital ICTs on political violence and global politics is perhaps less
intuitive, but they are connected in operational reality and as loci for
contests over the consequences of humanitarian aid.\[55\] As an
operational reality, political violence is often a source of
displacement, and there is a nexus between the vulnerability of
displaced populations and political violence.\[56\] Once a population is
displaced, their legitimacy within a secondary country or status as
affected can be contested by similar means. States and non-state actors
pursue their interests in the international political space, which may
not always in line with the best interests and rights of displaced
populations or humanitarian values. This is made manifest as political
settlements to resolve displacement and end conflicts may be blocked,
the question of whether it is safe for displaced populations to return
to their country of origin becomes politicized, or states which may seek
to build support for various interpretation of international law
undermine the rights of the displaced and crisis-affected.

### The Impact of Digital ICTs on Migration and Displaced Populations

Migrant networks as a whole and their use of networked digital ICTs have
been studied extensively in both the scholarly and grey
literature.\[57\] Even before the advent of digital technologies,
migrants have always communicated amongst themselves and back home, and
these social networks function as a source of information and social
capital.\[58\] Increasingly, these networks are thought to reduce risk,
influence decision making, and mobilize financial resources and
collective intelligence in ways that shape movement patterns across
environments and influence outcomes.\[59\] These networks tend to extend
themselves, and migrants often follow other migrants.\[60\] While these
networks have always existed, theory and evidence suggests that their
digitization may be affecting the nature of migration.

Even before the advent of mobile internet, access to digital ICTs has
been shown to play a role in the development of weak ties between
aspiring migrants and the diaspora, specifically for seeking information
about migration.\[61\] For some time, the internet has been a source of
information for migrants—irregular or otherwise—in the form of chat
rooms, websites, and Bulletin Board Services.\[62\] For example, a 2007
report commissioned for UNDP references websites that reportedly provide
detailed guidance to aid in journeys, and forums for communicating with
other potential migrants.\[63\] With the advent of social networking
sites, the process of developing and maintaining these ties has been
made easier and is shown to lower the threshold for immigration.\[64\]

Migrants use digital information sources as a tool for deciding where to
migrate, to reduce anxiety around decision making and as a mechanism for
finding support upon relocation.\[65\] These transformations facilitate
the spread of information and foster the creation of social capital by
migrants,\[66\] which may ultimately influence individuals’ decisions to
migrate in response to information about the availability of jobs,
housing, and settlement assistance.\[67\]

In addition to information about the migration process, networked
digital ICTs are used by migrants in other ways. Refugees and migrants
have been documented using mobile phones to share information,
coordinate among each other upon arrival and monitor for perceived
threats.\[68\] When BBC Media Action asked refugees who have mobiles why
they feel more resilient and less vulnerable, they found:

> "Many participants with mobile access explained that direct contact
> with other refugees who had already made the journey gave them access
> to a trusted network. They trusted these sources, before and during
> their own journeys, for advice on the best routes, smugglers’ contact
> details, places to stay on the journey, GPS coordinates and how to
> avoid police to ensure they arrived at each location safely.\[69\]"

At the same time, some migrants view mobile technology as a potential
source of risk: an avenue for tracking and monitoring by authorities or
non-state armed groups and of abuse and extortion by criminal
elements.\[70\]

Recent work applying quantitative social network analysis to migrant
networks finds that migrants with transnational networks receive more
information and financial resources than migrants with smaller local
networks.\[71\] Networked digital ICTs may play a role in transforming
migrant experiences into far more transnational experiences, as the
immediacy and density of their transnational communications
increase.\[72\] Thus, mobile connectivity may be strengthening latent
and weak ties in the social networks of migrants in a manner that
influences their decision-making and creates new benefits and risks.

### The Impact of Digital ICTs on Manifestations of Political Violence

Political violence and conflict are a major source of displacement, as
well as sources of increased vulnerability for the displaced.\[73\] While
the literature on migration demonstrates how individual behaviour may
change due to the influence of networked digital ICTs, as an aggregate,
individuals constitute and exist in larger publics, such as states. It
follows then that networked digital ICTs may affect society, including
the outbreak of uprisings and conflicts, and factor into the causes of
displacement and humanitarian crises.

In the aftermath of the Arab Spring and response to the perceived role
of mobile communications and social media in the genesis of those
protests, the political science literature has devoted discussion to the
role of ICTs and mobile communications coverage and the onset of
political violence and protest.\[74\] This has produced findings—albeit
contradictory and limited—covering the relationship between increased
cellular network density and the onset of violence\[75\]—and has raised
debate about whether connectivity has a prophylactic effect—helping
civilians avoid or prevent violence—or a harmful effect, making violence
more likely and more organized.

The contradictory nature of this evidence may exist in part because the
proxy for connectivity used in these studies is mobile communications
network coverage. In a 2G world, this proxy may have been sufficient for
making determinations about the impact of mobile ICTs on conflict, but
the expansion of networked digital ICTs and 3G technology may tell a
different story. Myanmar provides a telling example: A study by Bergren
and Bailard find no significant relationship between mobile phone
reception and the rate of violence between ethnic groups and the
government in Myanmar. \[76\] The paper once again uses mobile
communications coverage as a proxy for mobile phone access.\[77\]
Nevertheless, recent journalism posits a link between the rapid growth
of connectivity in Myanmar and the government’s ethnic cleansing
campaign against the Rohingya in that country’s Rakhine state.\[78\]

Myanmar has leapfrogged from nearly zero connectivity to widespread
access to the internet. In 2011, fewer than .02% of the country of 50
million was connected to the internet—by November 2016 that number had
reportedly soared to 35 million.\[79\] Facebook, through its Free Basics
program—in partnership with state telecom provider MTN—is reportedly
integral in connecting many of these to the internet—the platform now
has 30 million users in Myanmar—many of whom don’t interact with the
internet outside of Facebook.\[80\] Facebook has been implicated in the
spread of anti-Rohingya and anti-Muslim sentiment, hate speech, and
disinformation by political figures, extremists and everyday people in
Myanmar.\[81\] Evidence has emerged in the media of a coordinated effort
by the Myanmar military to deliberately use Facebook to incite violence
and turn society against the Rohingya.\[82\]

Bergren and Bailard believe it is unclear how well their paper relates
to violence against the Rohingya and that a follow-up study examining
the relationship between Facebook at this violence would be
useful.\[83\] This uncertainty demonstrates that our current
understanding of the effects of connectivity on societies, crises, and
affected populations is not complete, particularly in light of the rapid
pace of technological change.

### The Impact of Digital ICTs on Global Politics

If the potential exists for networked digital ICTs to disrupt politics
on a national level, so too does the potential for networked digital
ICTs to affect international politics in ways which may negatively
affect vulnerable populations, including refugees and displaced
populations. This section seeks to illustrate that the global networked
public, constituted of networked digital ICTs, is a repertoire for
contestation of the humanitarian arena. This contestation, and the
resulting range of possible outcomes, has ramifications for all
categories of crises-affected populations, including the displaced. This
may result, for example, in the undermining of rights and protection of
civilians, or, as may have happened in the case of the Global Compact
for Migration, the undermining of the rights of the displaced.\[84\]

The role of networks in influencing global politics is also well
established. Carpenter rightly points out that relational ties between
actors are politically salient, and when understood this way are known
to affect transnational trade, conflict, and enterprise.\[85\] Civil
society advocacy and the phenomenon of issue emergence in areas of human
rights and law are particularly well-studied through this lens.\[86\]
Networks of actors are adept at strategically deploy information to
influence target organizations and actors.\[87\] Further, information
technology as a means by which civil society and other non-state actors
strengthen networks, fostering information exchange, and engage in
advocacy activities across borders.\[88\] Technology makes geographic
distances become less relevant and the need for certain traditional
elements of power—particularly human and economic capital—is
significantly reduced.\[89\]

For humanitarians, what may be most important is that technology’s
effects can be harnessed by political actors to create new political
settlements.\[90\] Of course, this isn’t a new phenomenon per se, nor is
it the first-time networks can be said to have affected the global
order.\[91\] The novel dimension to modern global social networks,
however, is that unlike preceding mediums that facilitated the formation
of networks, these platforms have user bases which can exceed the
populations of even the largest nations on earth.\[92\] This becomes
more relevant in an era, as ICRC President Peter Maurer notes, where two
trends threaten to undermine the communality and consensus which forms
the basis of International Humanitarian Law: regional and global power
competition and the emergence of cyberspace as a battlefield.\[93\]

Syria provides a case of state and non-state actors working
collaboratively to influence public discourse and affect strategic
outcomes: Media reports and research points to a sustained influence
campaign targetting Syria Civil Defence, also known as the White
Helmets.\[94\] Wilson, et. al. find that this campaign is often a
collaborative effort between state media, western anti-war activists,
and alternative medias to produce narratives supporting the strategic
objectives of specific warring parties to the conflict or to countering
those of western human rights actors and states.\[95\] These narratives
contest civilian status of the White Helmets under humanitarian law by
labelling them tools of foreign influence, terrorists, and blaming them
for chemical weapons attacks. These efforts have been successful—online
discourse is dominated by content meant to delegitimize them and justify
their killing.\[96\]

This example demonstrates three ways in which the global networked
public is being used to contest the humanitarian arena in Syria. The
first is in controlling the outcomes of aid: Humanitarian aid has been
instrumentalized in the Syrian conflict\[97\] and local actors—such as
the White Helmets—have sought to provide aid in areas international
humanitarian organizations cannot access.\[98\] In controlling
narratives about these local actors, warring parties are able to
continue targeting them, and further constrain aid to contested
territories. The second is the use of these narratives to contest the
legitimacy of who gets to be a humanitarian in Syria—in painting local
actors as terrorists or tools of a foreign power, warring parties and
their online collaborators seek to undermine claims to neutrality and
impartiality. Third, in seeking to undermine the status of these actors
as civilians under international law, they seek to constrain normative
humanitarianism in a way that controls humanitarianism outcomes.

This sort of use of networked digital ICTs can be understood as part of
what Goddard et al., call a repertoire of social disruption, a means by
which states and other actors to create division within an opponent’s
population, with the aim of deterring action against their interests by
inhibiting the ability of opponents to collectively mobilize.\[99\]
States participate and shape this environment in multiple ways—from
leveraging flagship state media outlets, supporting and amplifying
friendly journalists, to pushing out a range of content on aligned but
ostensibly independent websites.\[100\] Thus the means by which these
narratives are spread are also salient: Narratives are packaged into
campaigns resemble astroturfing campaigns, repackaging content to appeal
across ideological and political divides.\[101\] This games the media
ecosystem by flooding search results with preferred narratives, as well
as ultimately undermining trust in available information.\[102\] Put
plainly, digital networked ICTs provide a toolkit by which
ill-intentioned actors can create uncertainty in states or organizations
which would otherwise be invested in normative humanitarian approaches
by using them "to identify and target fragmented populations, to feed
them disrupting information more directly, and isolate audiences from
competing claims."\[103\]

The unique topological features of digital networks increase the speed
and distance at which information and misinformation can spread.\[104\]
Opportunistic actors may be able to exploit this to convert
misinformation into disinformation campaigns.\[105\] These campaigns
often attempt to challenge or undermine dominant media
narratives.\[106\] Indeed, the use of networked digital ICT platforms by
state and non-state organizations to achieve strategic goals related to
political, geopolitical, or military outcomes by influencing public
discourse is now well documented.\[107\]

It is also the case that the networked digital ICTs—through the
mediation of the global networked public—may affect humanitarian action
in ways that are not all together as deliberate as instrumentalization
by warring parties or states. Roberts et al. note that the widely
discussed social media clusters oriented towards US politics may have
led US policymakers to act and impose quarantines—in violation of IHR
obligations.\[108\] They argue the global networked public itself may
have produced emergent effects that shaped the discourse around Ebola
and ultimately affected policy outcomes, including the diversion of
critical resources and the violation of International Health Regulations
(IHR).\[109\] Their research showed a disconnect between global health
experts—who were influential among the traditional media and the
discourse among the general public—whom global health experts failed to
influence. Within social media, public discussion was disproportionately
oriented towards the risk of US domestic cases. Thus, new politics may
emerge organically from network behaviour,\[110\] and intersect with
traditional media and polity in a manner which the Roberts et al. argue
impose constraints on humanitarian response.\[111\]

Humanitarianism exists in a world that is both political and densely
networked in the digital sense. These networks comprise a complex
system, capable of emergent behaviours which may exhibit a politics of
their own.\[112\] Networked digital ICTs—may create centres of
institutional power that are wielded within the political space
governing humanitarian response,\[113\] and which may be manipulated by
actors who are hostile to or seek to co-opt influence the humanitarian
arena. ICTs may also create emergent loci of power with the ability to
affect public discourses in such a way that drives policymakers to
act—even in violation of international law. Vinck, et al. note that
humanitarians need to better understand a potentially contentious and
divided media ecosystem.\[114\] Their focus is on the potential for the
erosion of trust between humanitarians and local populations. We argue
that, similarly, humanitarians need to better understand how the global
networked public and networked digital ICTs can undermine normative
humanitarian action and be used to manipulate the humanitarian system.

## A Research Agenda for Humanitarianism in the Digital Age

In the previous subsections, we have provided examples of the potential
effects of networked digital ICTs on the humanitarian arena, and how
these may in turn affect the nature of the crises and the outcomes of
aid. In order to acheive a more full understanding, the humanitarian
sector needs to pursue a comprehensive research agenda focused on the
range of effects networked digital ICTs are having on humanitarian
operations and outcomes. In the next two subsections, we suggest two
possible areas of research. The first seeks to understand the barriers
to ICT access and use among displaced populations, as well as defining
what constitutes information needs among the affected. The second seeks
to understand on how other actors—armed groups, NGOs, advocates,
political actors, and states—use networked digital ICTs to contest the
humanitarian arena, order humanitarian governance, and shape the
outcomes of aid. This agenda should not focus on how humanitarian actors
are using these technologies, as much research already exists in this
space.

### Barriers and facilitators to information technology access and use

The emergence ofcrisis-effected networked publics may give affected
populations a new voice for advocacy, and digital ICT-mediated networks
may create new opportunities for the displaced to find aid, self-rescue
and communicate with humanitarians. It may also create new risks and
harms for these populations as they use networked digital ICTs to fulfil
their information needs.\[115\] However, without a clear understanding
of the determinants of access to these networks—such as gender, age,
socio-economic status, or information preferences, information needs
cannot be appropriately evaluated, and humanitarians run the risk of not
perceiving the needs of vulnerable unconnected communities, even within
connected populations.

Existing evidence on displaced populations’ medium of choice for
obtaining information seems to indicate that these affected populations
have varying preferences regarding the type of communication tools that
they use. This is in part dependent on who is asked, and in part
possibly determined by the time and location. In some instances, radio
may be the preferred mode of information access;\[116\] in others, it
may be television and word of mouth.\[117\] Mobile telephones may be
seen as less trustworthy sources of information than others\[118\] or
even as a vector for potential threats.\[119\] In Italy, where migrants
originate from Africa, the Middle East, and Central and South Asia, the
utilized sources of information vary widely and include word of mouth,
Facebook, messaging applications, mobile telephony, and satellite TV.
Social media access plays a major role in facilitating the
communications needs of many of the migrants surveyed by Internews in
Italy in 2016.\[120\] This same report finds that smugglers dominate the
information landscape in both analogue and digital networked
communication—that is, word of mouth and social media communication—and
that information access varies by country of origin for a number of
reasons.\[121\]

Vernon et. al found parity between the global average and urban refugees
in terms of access to 3G networks, but access significantly lags the
global average among rural refugee populations, regarding both 3G access
and mobile access overall. It also finds that most refugees own a mobile
phone, and nearly 39% have a phone capable of internet access.\[122\]
Nevertheless, divides in access to mobile phones persist, and not enough
information is available to determine a conclusive reason for these
disparities. In 2015, 89% of refugees at Za’atari Camp in Jordan
reported owning a mobile phone;\[123\] however, 52% of refugees surveyed
arriving in Greece that same year said they did not have access to a
phone.\[124\] In their study of Za’atari, Maitland and Xu observed that
the relative wealth of Syrian refugees made them more likely to use
mobile technology to connect to the internet than refugees surveyed in
Rwandan camps they visited, which were limited to voice and text on
mobile platforms.\[125\] Maitland and Xu also find that gender did not
affect mobile phone ownership rates in Za’atari,\[126\] however,
information preference and needs surveys carried out by Internews found
that gender divides exist in both Northern Iraq and Kenya’s Dadaab
camps.\[127\]

Within the context of information behaviours by displaced people,
attention should be paid to the behaviours around and barriers to access
related to networked digital. The literature has begun to show that a
number of social factors may play into digital exclusion among
crisis-affected populations. For example, Wall *et al.*’s link between
information precarity and the stability and security of a person is a
complex one, with many intervening factors and a range of potential
outcomes which need to be better understood.\[128\] Wall suggests a
context-driven theory: the credibility of information about accessing
aid in the camp is viewed by the affected through a history of
scepticism of information from official channels due to a lifetime in an
authoritarian country where misinformation and propaganda were the
norms.\[129\]

Given the potentially transformative effect of these networked digital
ICTs on humanitarian outcomes, it is critical to understand these
barriers and facilitators. Poole’s research demonstrates a significant
link between mental health outcomes and phone access in affected
populations. However, a significant barrier to access was ownership,
which was in turn associated with gender. Returning to information
seeking behaviour models, this socio-cultural barrier mediates an
individual’s ability to access technology, which in turn affects their
access to information and may ultimately impact their health.\[130\]
Additional literature suggests that access to mobile phones improves
economic outcomes and resilience in crisis-affected populations.\[131\]
These studies need to be supplemented by further scholarly research that
explicitly measures phone access against additional health outcomes, and
other aid metrics, such as food security.

Understanding the information landscape will give humanitarians evidence
for how to better design response. The available evidence already
indicates that information related needs may be going unmet. For
example, the strategy of using and sharing multiple SIM cards—a practice
Maitland noted was used by the displaced in Za’atari to avoid perceived
Syrian surveillance, avoid network congestion and manage costs—makes it
difficult for camp staff to push out information to camp residents via
SMS or telephone. Camp economies have been seen to change in Za’atari,
driven by this trade and the need for phone charging stations and
internet access. The physical geography of camps will affect the ability
of displaced populations reliant on mobile and smart phones to access
information. It is unclear is how this affects social and economic
stratification within camps.\[132\]

An information need is inherently instrumental, in that it is a
recognized or perceived gap in knowledge or information thought
necessary to achieve a desired end state or goal.\[133\] In turn,
information seeking is a conscious activity, designed to fill the gaps
required to achieve a goal or reduce uncertainty around such a pattern
or gap.\[134\] To place information precarity\[135\] in context, and to
address its effects, it is necessary to understand the barriers to
information access—social, physical, and psychological—as well as the
motivations, needs and uses of information in the context of
humanitarian crises, particularly sustained crises. Understanding the
factors that both frustrate and satisfy displaced people’s information
needs is critical to improving humanitarian response. Without evidence
guiding the diagnosis of a displaced populations information practices
and eco-system, the humanitarian responder is unable to claim that they
are adequately meeting needs in the 21<sup>st</sup> century.

### Digital Networked ICTs and Contestation in the Humanitarian Arena

In 1980, Langdon Winner famously asked: "Do artifacts have politics?" He
argued that this might be the case in two ways. In the first, a specific
technology may provide the means by which political actors may capture
power—or in his language "settle an issue." In the second, technologies
may exhibit properties which rearrange social and political
systems.\[136\] Networked digital ICTs may display aspects of both—and
properties which create positive effects at the individual level may
have harmful effects on the macro-level. This may represent a paradox of
protection: While these technologies may give individual displaced
people new tools for wayfaring, decision making, and advocacy, the
aggregate effects of these same technologies may also erode protective
norms and produce political settlements that constrain humanitarians’
ability to respond.

Increasingly, the lines between offline and digital life are
blurring,\[137\] and the interplay between society and technology may be
producing new politics and means of contesting the humanitarian arena
and ordering humanitarian governance. This paper’s sections on political
violence and humanitarian governance show that networked digital ICTs
may exacerbate violence, inflame political tensions, or shift policy
choices which may in turn impact the human security status of affected
individuals and humanitarian operations—as demonstrated by Twitter’s
purported impact on the Ebola response and the role of social media in
shaping the humanitarian arena in Syria.\[138\] This assemblage of the
human and digital has the potential to create additional possible
vectors for harm—the production of mutually supporting alternative
narratives based on misinformation or disinformation\[139\] and of
politics which explicitly impact the human security status of the
affected.

The questions raised here are broader than humanitarianism. As a sector
whose normative *raison d’etre* is the prevention of suffering and
alleviation of harm, humanitarianism stands in a position where it can
see the emergence of these effects on the most vulnerable of
populations. It is critical for humanitarians to examine not just
individual components of the system, but to foster testable theoretical
approaches to understanding how harmful effects emerge, order
humanitarian governance, and affect the outcomes of aid.

## Conclusion

In the sections above, this paper has looked to literature outside the
humanitarian field to draw inferences about phenomena that may be
affecting humanitarian crises, including: how displaced populations may
be seeking information and the role that networked digital ICTs have in
meeting and changing their information needs, as well as the potential
barriers to access. We also discussed how access to networked digital
technology may affect the decision-making of the displaced, as well as
potentially affect their ability to self-advocate, thus affecting the
humanitarian arena and strategies required on the part of humanitarians
to achieve ideal aid outcomes.

We also discussed how these how networked digital ICTs are changing
crises on a larger scale. First, by raising unanswered questions about
their role in fostering conflict and subsequently generating or
exacerbating existing humanitarian crises. Second, by looking at how
they may alter the operational and political landscape in which crises
occur and be used as means for contesting the humanitarian arena and
ordering humanitarian governance.

This paper highlighted a series of gaps in the evidence and knowledge
confronting humanitarianism related to the use of networked digital
ICTs. To comprehend these changes, it is necessary to develop an
understanding of how networked digital ICTs are transforming the
humanitarian arena. Our understanding of the impact of networked digital
ICTs on the crisis-affected, including the displaced, the humanitarian
arena, and the resulting effects on humanitarian outcomes is limited. It
is incumbent upon the humanitarian sector to foster a research agenda
for defining the information needs of displaced populations,
understanding how they are using networked digital ICTs to fulfil them,
how access to these technologies may be changing their decision-making,
and how their use of these technologies, in hand with how other actors
in the humanitarian arena, including states, armed groups, and
humanitarians, is affecting humanitarian outcomes pertaining to the
needs and protection matrix of the displaced and indeed all
crisis-affected populations. Addressing and understanding these
questions may determine what humanitarianism means and does in the 21st
century.

1.  M. Hilbert and P. Lopez, "The World’s Technological Capacity to
    Store, Communicate, and Compute Information", *Science*, Vol. 332,
    No. 6025, 01 April 2011, pp. 62–64; Martin Hilbert, *Quantifying the
    Data Deluge and the Data Drought: Background note for the World
    Development Report 2016*, pp. 3–9.

2.  GSMA Intelligence, *The Mobile Economy: 2017*, GSMA, GSMA Mobile
    Economy, 2017, p. 6.

3.  "Migrants with mobiles: Phones are now indispensable for refugees",
    *The Economist*, 11 February 2017.

4.  Christopher Kuner *et al.*, *Handbook on Data Protection in
    Humanitarian Action*, International Committee of the Red Cross,
    2017, p. 159, at p. 14.

5.  Patrick Vinck, Anne Bennett, and Jacobo Quintanilla, *Engaging with
    people affected by armed conflicts and other situations of violence:
    recommendations for humanitarian origanizations and donors in the
    digital era*, International Committee of the Red Cross, Harvard
    Humanitarian Initiative, 2018, p. 94, at p. 13; ELRHA, *Global
    Prioritisation Exercise for Research and Innovation in the
    Humanitarian System: Phase One Mapping*, Phase One Mapping, ELRHA,
    Global Prioritisation Exercise for Research and Innovation in the
    Humanitarian System, 2017, p. 46: : n.b. This exercise notes that
    38% of humanitarian innovation and research projects are technology
    and communications focused, just 11% of research projects focused on
    technology versus 72% of innovation projects. Further, only 49% of
    humanitarian research is peer reviewed, and 28% do not discuss or
    disclose methodology. This points to a severe crisis of evidence
    regarding humanitarian technology. For the purposes of this report,
    ELHRA defined research as: "systematic investigations in
    humanitarian policy and practice" and innovation as "an "An
    iterative process that identifies, adjusts and diffuses ideas for
    improving humanitarian action."

6.  Patrick Vinck, Anne Bennett, and Jacobo Quintanilla, above note 8,
    p. 19.

7.  Kristin Bergtora Sandvik, Katja Lindskov Jacobsen, and Sean Martin
    McDonald, "Do no harm: A taxonomy of the challenges of humanitarian
    experimentation", *International Review of the Red Cross*, October
    2017; Christopher Kuner *et al.*, above note 7.

8.  Patrick Vinck, Anne Bennett, and Jacobo Quintanilla, above note 8,
    pp. 19–20.

9.  David Keen, *Complex emergencies*, Polity, Cambridge, 2008, p. 156;
    Patrick Vinck, Anne Bennett, and Jacobo Quintanilla, above note 8,
    p. 44.

10. International Rescue Committee, *Using ICT to Facilitate Access to
    Information and Accountability to Affected Populations in Urban
    Areas*, June, 2017, p. 16.

11. For example, consider the interviews cited in Theodora Hannides,
    Nicola Bailey, and Dwan Kaoukji, *Voices of Refugees: Information
    and Communication Needs of Refugees in Greece and Germany*, July
    2016, p. 25: "Many participants with mobile access explained that
    direct contact with other refugees who had already made the journey
    gave them access to a trusted network. They trusted these sources,
    before and during their own journeys, for advice on the best routes,
    smugglers’ contact details, places to stay on the journey, GPS
    coordinates and how to avoid police to ensure they arrived at each
    location safely." .

12. Ibid., p. 23.

13. Melissa Wall *et al.*, "Syrian refugees and information precarity",
    *New Media & Society*, Vol. 19, No. 2, 2017, pp. 241–242.

14. Rose Foran and Anahi Ayala Iacucci, *Lost in Translation: The
    Misinformed Journey of Migrants Across Italy*, Internews, May 2017,
    p. 14.

15. "Isolated and misinformed, Syrian refugees struggle", *Internews*,
    available at:
    https://www.internews.org/isolated-and-misinformed-syrian-refugees-struggle,
    , 14 January 2014.

16. Internews, above note 3, p. 27.

17. Jacobo Quintanilla, *Humanitarian Information Needs Assessment:
    Zaatari Refugee*, Internews, September 2012, p. 11.

18. Matthew Brunwasser, "A 21st-Century Migrant’s Essentials: Food,
    Shelter, Smartphone", *New York Times*, August 2015.

19. Alan Vernon, Kamel Deriche, and Samantha Eisenhauer, above note 4,
    p. 15.

20. Theodora Hannides, Nicola Bailey, and Dwan Kaoukji, above note 18,
    p. 25.

21. Alexander Betts *et al.*, *Refugee Economies: Rethinking Popular
    Assumptions*, Humanitarian Innovation Project, University of Oxford,
    2014, p. 33.

22. Danielle N. Poole, "Technology and Migration Survey", in "Technology
    and Migration Survey", *IDRG Annual Report 2017*, presented at the
    International Data Responsibility Group Annual Conference, Den Haag,
    2017.

23. Internews, *Dadaab, Kenya: Humanitarian Communications and
    Information Needs Assessment Among Refugees in the Camps*, August
    2011.

24. Alan Vernon, Kamel Deriche, and Samantha Eisenhauer, *Connecting
    Refugees. How Internet and Mobile Connectivity can improve refugee
    well-being and transform humanitarian action*, UNHCR, 2016, p. 12.

25. Paul Schmitt *et al.*, "Community-Level Access Divides: A Refugee
    Camp Case Study", in "Community-Level Access Divides: A Refugee Camp
    Case Study", *Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on
    Information and Communication Technologies and Development*,
    presented at the ICTD ’16 Eighth International Conference on
    Information and Communication Technologies and Development
    Conference, Ann Arbor, MI, 2016.

26. Patrick Vinck, Anne Bennett, and Jacobo Quintanilla, above note 8.

27. By Benjamin Doerr, Mahmoud Fouz, and Tobias Friedrich, "Why Rumors
    Spread So Quickly in Social Networks", *Communications of the ACM*,
    Vol. 55, No. 6, June 2012, p. 70.

28. Peter Haglich, Christopher Rouff, and Laura Pullum, "Detecting
    Emergence in Social Networks", *2010 IEEE Second International
    Conference on Social Computing*, 2010, p. 694.

29. Mark Granovetter, "The Strength of Weak Ties", *American Journal of
    Sociology*, Vol. 78, No. 6, May 1973, p. 1360.

30. Caroline Haythornthwaite, "Strong, Weak, and Latent Ties and the
    Impact of New Media", *The Information Society*, Vol. 18, No. 5,
    2002, pp. 385–401, at p. 389.

31. Mark Granovetter, above note 37, p. 1360.

32. danah boyd, "Social Network Sites as Networked Publics: Affordances,
    Dynamics, and Implications", in Z. Papacharissi (ed.), *Networked
    Self: Identity, Community, and Culture on Social Network Sites*,
    Routledge, New York, NY, 2011, p. 39.

33. Ibid., p. 1.

34. Ibid., p. 9.

35. Ibid., p. 7.

36. Jon Askonas, "How Tech Utopia Fostered Tyranny", *The New Atlantis*,
    No. Winter, 2019, p. 11, at p. 9.

37. Ibid., p. 10.

38. Rebecca Lewis, *Alternative Influence: Broadcasting the Reactionary
    Right on YouTube*, Data and Society, Data & Society’s Media
    Manipulation research initiative, 2018, p. 61, at pp. 36–37.

39. Jon Askonas, above note 49, p. 10.

40. Kate Crawford, "Can an Algorithm be Agonistic? Ten Scenes from Life
    in Calculated Publics", *Science, Technology, & Human Values*, Vol.
    41, No. 1, January 2016, p. 77.

41. Michael N. Barnett, "Humanitarian Governance", *Annual Review of
    Political Science*, Vol. 16, No. 1, 11 May 2013, pp. 379–398, at p.
    381.

42. Ibid., p. 382.

43. Dennis Dijkzeul and Kristin Bergtora Sandvik, "A world in turmoil:
    governing risk, establishing order in humanitarian crises",
    *Disasters*, Vol. 43, No. S2, April 2019, pp. S85–S108, at p. 3.

44. Dorothea Hilhorst and Bram J. Jansen, "Humanitarian Space as Arena:
    A Perspective on the Everyday Politics of Aid: Humanitarian Space as
    Arena", *Development and Change*, Vol. 41, No. 6, November 2010, pp.
    1117–1139, at p. 1117.

45. Ibid., p. 1120.

46. Michael N. Barnett, above note 54, p. 382; Stacie E. Goddard and
    Daniel H. Nexon, "The Dynamics of Global Power Politics: A Framework
    for Analysis", *Journal of Global Security Studies*, Vol. 1, No. 1,
    02 February 2017, pp. 4–18, at p. 10.

47. Dennis Dijkzeul and Kristin Bergtora Sandvik, above note 56, p. 12.

48. Hugo Slim, "Is Humanitarianism Being Politicised? A Reply to David
    Rieff", *The Dutch Red Cross Symposium on Ethics in Aid*, No.
    October, 2003; Sarah Collinson and Samir Elhawary, *Humanitarian
    Space: A review of trends and issues*, HPG Report, 32, Overseas
    Development Institute Humanitarian Policy Group, April 2012, p. 3.

49. Jon Askonas, above note 49, p. 9.

50. Ibid., pp. 11–12; Peter Dreier and Christopher R. Martin, "How ACORN
    Was Framed: Political Controversy and Media Agenda Setting",
    *Perspectives on Politics*, Vol. 8, No. 3, September 2010, pp.
    761–792, at p. 763.

51. David J. Betz and Tim Stevens, *Cyberspace and the state: toward a
    strategy for cyber-power*, Adelphi (Series) (International Institute
    for Strategic Studies) 424, Routledge for the International
    Institute for Strategic Studies, Abingdon, 2011, pp. 10–11, 108–118.

52. For a discussion of the distinction between intermediaries and
    mediators, see Bruno Latour, *Reassembling the social: an
    introduction to actor-network-theory*, Clarendon lectures in
    management studies, Oxford University Press, Oxford ; New York,
    2005, p. 38; For readers interested in current debates around how
    cyberspace functions as a mediator and its role in constructing
    reality, see Nick Couldry and Andreas Hepp, *The mediated
    construction of reality*, Polity Press, Cambridge, UK ; Malden, MA,
    2017.

53. Michael N. Barnett, above note 54, p. 389.

54. Patrick Vinck, Anne Bennett, and Jacobo Quintanilla, above note 8,
    pp. 14, 64.

55. Dennis Dijkzeul and Kristin Bergtora Sandvik, above note 56, p. 12.

56. "OHCHR | Questions and answers about IDPs", available at:
    https://www.ohchr.org/EN/Issues/IDPersons/Pages/Issues.aspx, (all
    internet references were accessed in August 2019).

57. Joris Schapendonk and David van Moppes, *Migration and Information:
    Images of Europe, migration encouraging factors and en route
    information sharing*, 16, Radboud University, Working Papers
    Migration and Development Series, 2007.

58. Rianne Dekker and Godfried Engbersen, "How social media transform
    migrant networks and facilitate migration", *Global Networks*, Vol.
    14, No. 4, October 2014.

59. Charles Tilly, "Transplanted Networks", in V. Yans-McLaughlin (ed.),
    *Immigration Reconsidered: History, Sociology, and Politics*, Oxford
    University Press, New York, 1991, pp. 84–85; Jacques Poot,
    "Information, communication, and networks in international
    migration system", *The Annals of Regional Science*, Vol. 30, No. 1,
    1996, pp. 65–66; Douglas S. Massey and Felix García España, "The
    social process of international migration", *Science*, Vol. 237, No.
    4816, 1987, p. 737; Marieke Wissink and Valentina Mazzucato, "In
    transit: Changing social networks of sub-Saharan African migrants in
    Turkey and Greece", *Social Networks*, 31 March 2017; Monica Boyd,
    "Family and Personal Networks in International Migration: Recent
    Developments and New Agendas", *International Migration Review*,
    Vol. 23, No. 3, 1989; Eva Thulin and Bertil Vilhelmson, "Virtual
    practices and migration plans: A qualitative study of urban young
    adults", *Population, Space and Place*, Vol. 20, No. 5, July 2014,
    pp. 389–401, at p. 398.

60. Charles Tilly, above note 73, p. 86.

61. Harry H. Hiller and Tara M. Franz, "New ties, old ties and lost
    ties: the use of the internet in diaspora", *New Media & Society*,
    Vol. 6, No. 6, December 2004, p. 738.

62. Ibid., pp. 738–739.

63. Jean-Yves Hamel, "Information and Communication Technologies and
    Migration", *Human Development Research Paper*, No. 39, 2009, p. 17.

64. Rianne Dekker and Godfried Engbersen, above note 72, p. 408.

65. Adela Ros *et al.*, *Migration and information flows: a new lens for
    the study of contemporary international migration*, WP07-002,
    Internet Interdisiplinary Institute, Working Paper Series, 2007; Eva
    Thulin and Bertil Vilhelmson, above note 73, pp. 395–396.

66. Rianne Dekker and Godfried Engbersen, above note 72, p. 408; Harry
    H. Hiller and Tara M. Franz, above note 77, pp. 748–749.

67. Rianne Dekker and Godfried Engbersen, above note 72, p. 407.

68. Nicholas Harney, "Precarity, affect and problem solving with mobile
    phones by asylum seekers, refugees and migrants in Naples, Italy",
    *Journal of Refugee Studies*, Vol. 26, No. 4, 2013, p. 548.

69. Theodora Hannides, Nicola Bailey, and Dwan Kaoukji, above note 18,
    p. 25.

70. Bryce Clayton Newell, Ricardo Gomez, and Verónica E. Guajardo,
    "Information seeking, technology use, and vulnerability among
    migrants at the United States–Mexico border", *The Information
    Society*, Vol. 32, No. 3, 2016, pp. 184–185.

71. Başak Bilecen and Andrés Cardona, "Do transnational brokers always
    win? A multilevel analysis of social support", *Social Networks*, 27
    March 2017, p. 9.

72. Mihaela Nedelcu, "Migrants’ New Transnational Habitus: Rethinking
    Migration Through a Cosmopolitan Lens in the Digital Age", *Journal
    of Ethnic and Migration Studies*, Vol. 38, No. 9, November 2012, pp.
    1346–1352.

73. above note 69.

74. Allan Dafoe and Jason Lyall, "From cell phones to conflict?
    Reflections on the emerging ICT–political conflict research agenda",
    *Journal of Peace Research*, Vol. 52, No. 3, May 2015.

75. Jan H. Pierskalla and Florian M. Hollenbach, "Technology and
    Collective Action: The Effect of Cell Phone Coverage on Political
    Violence in Africa", *AMERICAN POLITICAL SCIENCE REVIEW*, Vol. 107,
    No. 2, May 2013; Jacob N. Shapiro and Nils B. Weidmann, "Is the
    Phone Mightier Than the Sword? Cellphones and Insurgent Violence in
    Iraq", *INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATION*, Vol. 69, No. 2, 2015; Catie
    Snow Bailard, "Ethnic conflict goes mobile: Mobile technology’s
    effect on the opportunities and motivations for violent collective
    action", *Journal of Peace Research*, Vol. 52, Nos. 3, SI, May 2015.

76. Anne Bergren and Catie Snow Bailard, "Information and Communication
    Technology and Ethnic Conflict in Myanmar: Organizing for Violence
    or Peace?", *SOCIAL SCIENCE QUARTERLY*, Vol. 98, No. 3, September
    2017.

77. Ibid., p. 899.

78. United Nations Human Rights Council, *Report of the Independent
    International Fact-Finding Mission on Myanmar*, A/HRC/39/64, United
    Nations Human Rights Council, 12 September 2018, pp. 16–18.

79. Sheera Frenkel, "This Is What Happens When Millions Of People
    Suddenly Get The Internet", *BuzzFeed*, available at:
    https://www.buzzfeed.com/sheerafrenkel/fake-news-spreads-trump-around-the-world,
    (all internet references were accessed in November 2017), 20
    November 2016.

80. Kevin Roose, "Forget Washington. Facebook’s Problems Abroad Are Far
    More Disturbing.", *The New York Times*, 29 October 2017; Megan
    Specia and Paul Mozur, "A War of Words Puts Facebook at the Center
    of Myanmar’s Rohingya Crisis", *The New York Times*, 27 October
    2017.

81. Megan Specia and Paul Mozur, above note 100; Megha Rajagopalan,
    "Internet Trolls Are Using Facebook To Target Myanmar’s Muslims",
    *BuzzFeed*, available at:
    https://www.buzzfeed.com/meghara/how-fake-news-and-online-hate-are-making-life-hell-for,
    (all internet references were accessed in November 2017), 18 March
    2017; Hannah Beech, "Across Myanmar, Denial of Ethnic Cleansing and
    Loathing of Rohingya", *The New York Times*, 24 October 2017.

82. Paul Mozur, "A Genocide Incited on Facebook, With Posts From
    Myanmar’s Military", *The New York Times*, 18 October 2018.

83. Conversation with author: Catie Snow Bailard, "So, not clear how it
    relates to current Rohingya events, but was just thinking today this
    may be a good follow-up study.", *Twitter*, available at:
    https://twitter.com/search?q=%40catie\_bailard%20%40mountainherder\&src=typd,
    (all internet references were accessed in November 2017), 09 October
    2017.

84. Laurens Cerulus and Eline Schaart, "How the UN migration pact got
    trolled", *POLITICO*, available at:
    https://www.politico.eu/article/united-nations-migration-pact-how-got-trolled/,
    (all internet references were accessed in August 2019), 03 January
    2019.

85. R. Charli Carpenter, *Lost Causes: Agenda Vetting in Global Issue
    Networks and the Shaping of Human Security*, Cornell University
    Press, 16 May 2014, pp. 566–581.

86. Richard M. Price, "Transnational Civil Society and Advocacy in World
    Politics", *World Politics*, Vol. 55, No. 4, 11 December 2003; R.
    Charli Carpenter, "Setting the Advocacy Agenda: Theorizing Issue
    Emergence and Nonemergence in Transnational Advocacy Networks",
    *International Studies Quarterly*, Vol. 51, No. 1, March 2007.

87. Margaret E. Keck and Kathryn Sikkink, *Activists beyond borders:
    advocacy networks in international politics*, Cornell University
    Press, Ithaca, N.Y, 1998, p. 2.

88. Ibid., pp. 19–21, 28–32.

89. David J. Betz and Tim Stevens, above note 64, p. 102; Franklin D.
    Kramer, Stuart H. Starr, and Larry K. Wentz (eds.), *Cyberpower and
    National Security*, Potamac Books, Inc, Dulles, VA, 2009, p. 41.

90. Kristin Bergtora Sandvik, "The Humanitarian Cyberspace: Shrinking
    Space or Expanding Frontier?", *Third World Quarterly*, Vol. 37, No.
    1, January 2016, p. 21.

91. e.g., Religious networks during the European wars of religion may
    have forged new identities across national borders and constrained
    the abilities of leaders to mobilize against crises and reconfigured
    power relations in Europe. That these networks were pre-digital
    should not discount the potential impact of networked digital ICTs
    to reconfiguring power in the modern world—recalling that the
    printing press played an important, albeit non-deterministic, role
    in the spread of new religious ideas and identities in Early Modern
    Europe. The change in the scale and reduction in cost by which
    information which could be distributed following the invention and
    diffusion of Gutenberg’s movable type into society has few analogues
    save the invention of radio, television, and the internet. For more
    see: Daniel Nexon, "The Dynastic-Imperial Pathway", in "The
    Dynastic-Imperial Pathway", *The Struggle for Power in Early Modern
    Europe: Religious Conflict, Dynastic Empires, and International
    Change*, p. 33; and Jacques Barzun, *From dawn to decadence: 500
    years of western cultural life, 1500 to the present*, Perennial, New
    York, N.Y, 2001.

92. Mark Zuckerberg, "Mark Zuckerberg -As of this morning, the Facebook
    community is...", *Facebook*, available at:
    https://www.facebook.com/zuck/posts/10103831654565331, (all internet
    references were accessed in November 2017), 27 June 2017; Welch,
    Chris, "Facebook crosses 2 billion monthly users - The Verge", *The
    Verge*, available at:
    https://www.theverge.com/2017/6/27/15880494/facebook-2-billion-monthly-users-announced,
    (all internet references were accessed in November 2017), 27 June
    2017; John Lanchester, "You Are the Product", *London Review of
    Books*, 17 August 2017.

93. Peter Maurer, Charles Stimson, and Susan Glasser, "Rules in War – A
    Thing of the Past?", Center for Strategic & International Studies,
    10 May 2019.

94. Olivia Solon, "How Syria’s White Helmets became victims of an online
    propaganda machine", *The Guardian*, 18 December 2017; Emma Grey
    Ellis, "Inside the Conspiracy Theory That Turned Syria's First
    Responders Into Terrorists", *Wired Magazine*, April 2017; The Syria
    Campaign, *Killing the Truth*, The Syria Campaign, 20 December 2017;
    Louisa Loveluck, "Russian disinformation campaign targets Syria’s
    beleaguered rescue workers", *Washington Post*, 18 December 2018.

95. Tom Wilson, Kaitlyn Zhou, and Kate Starbird, "Assembling Strategic
    Narratives: Information Operations as Collaborative Work within an
    Online Community", Vol. 2, p. 25, at p. 20.

96. Kate Starbird, Ahmer Arif, and Tom Wilson, "Disinformation as
    Collaborative Work: Surfacing the Participatory Nature of Strategic
    Information Operations", in "Disinformation as Collaborative Work:
    Surfacing the Participatory Nature of Strategic Information
    Operations", Vol. CSCW, presented at the PACMHCI, 2019, p. 10.

97. Ben Parker, "Humanitarian besieged", *ODI HPN*, November 2013;
    HRCA/HRC/37/721 February 2018p. 4; HRCA/HRC/39/659 August 2018pp. 9,
    16.

98. Dalia Abdelwahid, "‘You got the stuff?’: humanitarian activist
    networks in Syria", *ODI HPN*, November 2013.

99. Stacie E. Goddard, Paul K. MacDonald, and Daniel H. Nexon,
    "Repertoires of statecraft: instruments and logics of power
    politics", *International Relations*, Vol. 33, No. 2, June 2019, pp.
    1–18, at p. 10.

100. Kate Starbird, Ahmer Arif, and Tom Wilson, above note 139, p. 13.

101. Kate Starbird *et al.*, "Ecosystem or Echo-System? Exploring
     Content Sharing across Alternative Media Domains", in "Ecosystem or
     Echo-System? Exploring Content Sharing across Alternative Media
     Domains", *12th International AAAI Conference on Web and Social
     Media (ICWSM-18)*, presented at the 12th International AAAI
     Conference on Web and Social Media (ICWSM-18), Stanford, CA, 2018.

102. Kate Starbird, Ahmer Arif, and Tom Wilson, above note 139, p. 13.

103. Stacie E. Goddard, Paul K. MacDonald, and Daniel H. Nexon, above
     note 148, p. 10.

104. By Benjamin Doerr, Mahmoud Fouz, and Tobias Friedrich, above note
     35, p. 70.

105. Cass R. Sunstein and Adrian Vermeule, "Conspiracy Theories: Causes
     and Cures\*", *Journal of Political Philosophy*, Vol. 17, No. 2, 01
     June 2009.

106. Kate Starbird, "Examining the Alternative Media Ecosystem through
     the Production of Alternative Narratives of Mass Shooting Events on
     Twitter", in "Examining the Alternative Media Ecosystem through the
     Production of Alternative Narratives of Mass Shooting Events on
     Twitter", *11th International AAAI Conference on Web and Social
     Media*, presented at the 11th International AAAI Conference on Web
     and Social Media, Montreal, 2017, p. 10.

107. Jen Weedon, William Nuland, and Alex Stamos, *Information
     Operations and Facebook*, Facebook, 2017, p. 4.

108. Hal Roberts *et al.*, "Digital Health Communication and Global
     Public Influence: A Study of the Ebola Epidemic", *Journal of
     Health Communication*, Vol. 22, No. sup1, 2017, pp. 53–55.

109. Ibid., pp. 51–52.

110. For an understanding of how emergent behavior of this sort may
     occur in social networks, see Peter Haglich, Christopher Rouff, and
     Laura Pullum, above note 36.

111. Hal Roberts *et al.*, above note 155.

112. Peter Haglich, Christopher Rouff, and Laura Pullum, above note 36,
     p. 695.

113. Kristin Bergtora Sandvik, above note 118, p. 21.

114. Patrick Vinck, Anne Bennett, and Jacobo Quintanilla, above note 8,
     p. 44.

115. Patrick Vinck, Anne Bennett, and Jacobo Quintanilla, above note 8.

116. Internews, above note 3.

117. *Inter-Agency Rapid Assessment Report: Understanding the
     information and Communication Needs among IDPs in Northern Iraq*,
     Inter-Agency Rapid Assessment Report, August 2014, p. 15.

118. Jacobo Quintanilla, above note 25; Internews, above note 192.

119. Carleen Maitland and Ying Xu, "A Social Informatics Analysis of
     Refugee Mobile Phone Use: A Case Study of Za’atari Syrian Refugee
     Camp", *43rd Research Conference on Communications, Information and
     Internet Policy (TPRC)*, 2015; Bryce Clayton Newell, Ricardo Gomez,
     and Verónica E. Guajardo, above note 88, pp. 184–185.

120. Rose Foran and Anahi Ayala Iacucci, above note 21, p. 12.

121. Ibid., pp. 12–13.

122. Alan Vernon, Kamel Deriche, and Samantha Eisenhauer, above note 4,
     p. 12.

123. Paul Schmitt *et al.*, above note 5.

124. UNHCR, *Syrian Refugee Arrivals In Greece - Preliminary
     Questionnaire Findings April-September 2015*, UNHCR, December 2015,
     p. 15.

125. Carleen Maitland and Ying Xu, above note 194, p. 7.

126. Ibid., p. 8.

127. Internews, above note 192; Internews, above note 3.

128. Melissa Wall *et al.*, above note 20.

129. Ibid.

130. Danielle N. Poole, above note 30.

131. Theodora Hannides, Nicola Bailey, and Dwan Kaoukji, above note 18;
     Alexander Betts *et al.*, above note 29.

132. Carleen Maitland and Ying Xu, above note 194, p. 5.

133. Andrew Green, "What do we mean by user needs?", *British Journal of
     academic librarianship*, Vol. 5, No. 2, 1990, pp. 65–66.

134. Donald O. Case and Lisa M. Given, *Looking for Information: A
     Survey of Research on Information Seeking, Needs, and Behavior*,
     Emerald Publishing Group, Bingley, UK, 2016, pp. 89–91.

135. Melissa Wall *et al.*, above note 20.

136. Langdon Winner, "Do artifacts have politics?", *Daedalus*, Vol.
     109, No. 1, 1980, pp. 148–164, at p. 123.

137. Luciano Floridi, *The 4th revolution: how the infosphere is
     reshaping human reality*, Oxford University Press, New York, NY,
     2014.

138. Hal Roberts *et al.*, above note 155, p. 51.

139. Kate Starbird, above note 153, p. 5.
